# Features

- **Cross-platform:** Windows is a first-class citizen - no dependency on a
  POSIX-compliant shell (or any shell). Werk files work on all platforms out of
  the box.

- **[Simple language:](./language.md)** Werk files are written in a simple and
  human-friendly language that's easy to understand. It is designed to be
  written by hand.

- **[Task recipes:](./task_recipes.md)** Real support for executing project
  scrips, similar to `just` recipes or `.PHONY` Make targets. A command recipe
  will be run at most once per `werk` invocation.

- **[Build recipes:](./build_recipes.md)** Files can be built from Make-like
  patterns, and rebuilt according to modification time.

- **[Advanced outdatedness:](./outdatedness.md)** `werk` does more than just
  compare file modification timestamps. Metadata is cached between runs to
  support additional sources of "outdatedness".

- **Separate output directory:** All files produces by `werk` are put in a
  separate output directory, which is always what you want. This is hard to
  achieve with Make.

- **[Globbing:](./language/operations.md#glob)** Filesystem glob patterns work
  out of the box, and can be used reliably in dependencies. `werk` caches a hash
  of the glob result between builds, so file deletion is detected as a change.
  Globbing is based on the `globset` crate, which comes from `ripgrep`.

- **Paths can contain spaces:** Make simply cannot deal.

- **[Depfile support:](./depfile_support.md)** Depfile output from C-like
  compilers such as `clang`, `gcc`, `cl`, `glslc`, etc. are specially supported
  in build recipes. When a recipe contains a `depfile` dependency, it is
  automatically built and included when evaluating the dependencies of that
  recipe.

- **.gitignore support:** The `ignore` crate is used to hide files from `werk`.

- **Dry-run:** Pass `--dry-run` to diagnose the build process without generating
  any output.

- **Concurrency:** Build recipes and tasks run in parallel when possible.

- (TODO) **Autoclean:** Werk is aware of which files it has generated, and can
  automatically clean them up from the output directory.

- (TODO) **Autowatch:** Werk can be run in `--watch` mode, which waits for file
  changes and automatically rebuilds when any change is detected.

# Limitations

- **Cross-platform:** Paths and commands must work across all platforms. `werk`
  does not require a shell (like `sh` or `bash`), but that also means that
  common shell features are not available. The language provides cross-platform
  alternatives in most cases.

- **Declarative:** Very advanced build logic can be difficult to express. If the
  limited expression support in `werk` is insufficient (and can't be easily
  supported in the model), consider using a more advanced solution like GNU
  make, CMake, ninja-build, scons, cargo-script, etc.

- **Separate output directory:** It is not possible to put output files next to
  input files, and files in the output directory are assumed to be generated by
  `werk`.

- **Multiple recipes matching the same pattern:** As opposed to Make, build
  recipes are not disambiguated by their inputs. This means that for example it
  is not possible to have two recipes that match `%.o`, where one takes `%.c` as
  input and the other takes `%.cpp` as input.
  - *Workaround 1:* Define separate recipes `%.c.o` and `%.cpp.o` to build the two
    kinds of source files with different output file extensions.
  - *Workaround 2:* Use capture patterns, so the build recipe pattern is
    `%.(c|cpp)`, and use `match` expressions to generate the correct compiler
    arguments based on the captured pattern `{0}`, which will evaluate to either
    "c" or "cpp".

- **Multiple outputs from a single recipe:** This is not supported. The typical
  example is a code generator that outputs both a header file and a source file,
  like `bison`. *Note: This may be explicitly supported in the future.*
  - *Workaround:* For the common case of a `bison` parser, define the recipe for
    the generated `parser.h` file, and add another recipe for the `parser.c`
    file that has no commands, but just depends on `parser.h`.

- **Detailed parallelism control:**  `werk` currently does not support marking
  specific recipes as "non-parallel". The only way to control parallelism is by
  supplying the `--jobs` command line parameter, which controls the number of
  worker threads.
